---
layout: post
title: Five non-technical books for software engineers
description: These books have helped me become a better software engineer, and person in general. Because life isn’t always about work.
image: /images/posts/five-non-technical-books.jpg
canonicalUrl: https://medium.com/@MitchG23/five-non-technical-books-for-software-engineers-8b53d64585e
---

We have seen the rapid growth and evolution of CSS in JS libraries in the past few years. It's an area that's both mature enough for large scale applications, and young enough to have no library that's a clear winner. Theme UI is a new library built on top of the Emotion CSS in JS library, that helps you build consistent, themeable React apps based on a style guide. Having been a proponent of libraries that Theme UI builds upon, such as Tachyons and Styled System, Theme UI seems like a natural progression of those libraries to me.

## Benefits of style guide driven development
If you've ever worked on a medium to large application that has been worked on by many different people over time, you know that consistency can be hard to maintain. The amount of colors, spacing, font-sizes, media queries can get out of control. Having a style guide combats that by providing a set of constraints that your applications UI should adhere to, helping maintain a consistent look and feel.

I've also found that having a style guide leads to a more enjoyable developer experience. There is less time spent worrying about specific values, such as padding for a specific element as your choices are limited. And it helps reduce conflicts with designers and during code reviews.

## What is Theme UI

Theme UI combines many popular styling tools into one mini-framework like library. Theme UI is built with:

- **Emotion**: a performant and flexible CSS-in-JS library
- **MDX**: an authorable format that lets you use JSX in markdown documents
- **Styled System**: similar theme based styling library but with a lower level API that is not coupled to Emotion or React
- **Typography.js**: optionally used for creating rich typographic styles with a simple, high-level API

Theme UI has just recently started being used as part of [Gatsby themes](https://www.gatsbyjs.org/blog/2019-07-03-customizing-styles-in-gatsby-themes-with-theme-ui/), as a way to customize and switch between blog themes. It's perfect for this, but I also believe it's a great way of styling any React application. Building React apps with Theme UI is like using Emotion with first class support for theming and a more convenient way to handle responsive styles.

## Getting started with Theme UI

Enough talk, let's see how it works. First of all let's create a new React app by running:

```text
npx create-react-app theme-ui-app
```

After that's finished installing, you can view what we currently have, by running the following commands:

```text
cd theme-ui-app
npm start
```

Then open [http://localhost:3000](http://localhost:3000/) in your browser to view your app. Now install the required libraries for Theme UI:

```text
npm i theme-ui @emotion/core @mdx-js/react
```


3. Introduce system UI. A standardized way to include style guide units and how to use with emotion or styled components 
4. Introduce theme UI as an abstraction on top 
5. Create demo app to show how to set up
6. Build a simple layout maybe a product grid with a sidebar 
7. Focus on simplified media queries, values from theme provider, values based on props